From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Bubaro. This is the Daily.
[Music]
During an extraordinary televised news
conference on Monday night, President
Trump repeatedly gave out unproven
medical advice that linked autism to
Tylenol and childhood vaccines.
Today, my colleague Azim Geri on what
exactly Trump claimed, what decades of
scientific research actually tells us,
and the confusion that the president has
now created.
[Applause]
It's Tuesday, September 23rd.
[Music]
Azen, thank you for making time for us
after a very long day. We're reaching
you at 9:00 p.m.
>> I'm happy to be here. Thanks for having
me.
>> I think it's hard to overstate just how
unusual
and at times literally jaw-dropping
this news conference that we're going to
be talking about today was to watch. And
I watched it alongside you.
>> Yeah. I mean, I want to say that I've
never seen anything like it. The
president was acting like he was a
doctor, but much of what he was saying
was totally untethered from um what we
know from medicine and it was
potentially dangerous according to a lot
of the doctors who watched it. So, it
was truly remarkable. Well, I wonder if
you can start by just describing the
context for this news conference.
>> So, I think for me this goes back to
April when the CDC announced its latest
data on the prevalence of autism among
kids in the United States. And they
found basically that the numbers had
continued a really long running trend of
increasing. That now one in 31 kids in
the United States have an autism
diagnosis. And that number is five times
higher than what the CDC found when it
first started collecting this data in
just 2000. So this is obviously news
that is concerning especially to our new
health secretary RFK Jr. who, you know,
has spent much of his career focused on
autism and even connecting autism
repeatedly over his career to vaccines.
And months into his tenure, he holds
this big press conference um where he
says that autism is an epidemic and it
is entirely preventable and it is his
job now as the health secretary of the
United States to find out what is
causing it to increase. And he promises
that he will come to the American public
with answers to that question by
September.
>> Somewhat arbitrarily by September.
>> Yeah. Which everyone who has been
studying autism for decades was
incredibly skeptical of this and pretty
worried because this has been a question
that people have been studying their
entire careers. And the idea that he
could whip something together in 5
months was a little concerning.
>> Right. But here we were on Monday as
promised by the end of September and we
get a news conference and Kennedy is
there but right away it's pretty clear
that President Trump is going to be
dominating this news conference.
>> Yes.
>> Thank you very much.
So I've been waiting for this meeting
for 20 years. Actually,
>> President Trump is the first speaker at
the conference. He kind of kicks things
off and he immediately starts riffing
pretty wildly.
>> We heard and I always had very strong
feelings about autism and how it
happened.
>> Right. And I just want to flag at
several key moments in Trump's speech
here, he says things that are not
grounded in science. In fact, that
science contradicts. And so we're going
to fact check what he said in a lot of
detail
>> after we talk about what it is he said.
>> Yeah. Um so he he starts off the press
conference.
>> Meteoric rise in autism is among the
most alarming public health developments
in history. There's never been anything
like this.
>> He says that you know this is a horrible
horrible crisis. And pretty quickly he
gets to what he thinks is behind this
rise.
>> Effective immediately the FDA will be
notifying physicians that the use of
said well let's see how we say that
>> acetaminophen
acetaminophen
is that okay
>> which is acetaminophen
>> the active ingredient in the very common
household painkiller Tylenol. So taking
Tylenol
is uh not good. All right, I'll say it.
It's not good.
>> And he starts to establish what he says
is a clear link between Tylenol and its
use in pregnancy and autism in children.
And he says repeatedly that
>> but with Tylenol, don't take it. Don't
take it.
>> Pregnant women should not take this
drug. Don't take Tylenol.
>> He says, you know, don't take it.
>> Fight like hell not to take it.
>> Tough it out.
>> There may be a point where you have to
and that you'll
>> you have to work out with yourself. So,
don't take Tylenol. Other things
>> is really giving explicitly
>> very black and white warnings to
pregnant women to stay away from the
only painkiller really recommended for
use in pregnancy.
>> That's the way I feel. I've been very
strong on this subject for a long time.
You know, life is common sense, too.
>> And he's also saying, I'm, you know, I'm
not a doctor
>> and there's a lot of common sense in
this.
>> This is how I feel.
>> Things like this.
>> The people behind me, RFK, Marty Mccari
might disagree with this because they're
waiting for the studies,
>> but I'd like to be a little bit more uh
a little speedier in the process of a
recommendation because there's no harm
in
>> But he's saying, "Listen to me. I'm the
president. Here's my medical advice to
you." And it's so important to me to
take see the doctor four times or five
times for a vaccine.
>> And then he starts talking about
vaccines, too.
>> Just break it up. Break it up because
it's too much liquid, too many different
>> He says that, you know, the the
childhood immunization schedule is
loading up kids with too many vaccines.
It's like 80 different vaccines and
beyond vaccines and 80
>> too many different things going into
babies at too big a number.
>> So let those be taken separately. And
then hepatitis B is sexually
transmitted.
>> He talks about the hepatitis B vaccine.
>> There's no reason to give a baby that's
almost just born hepatitis B,
>> you know, and says that it shouldn't be
given to children until they are 12. He
goes on and on.
>> And by the way, I think I can say that
there are certain groups of people that
don't take vaccines and don't take any
pills that have no autism.
>> And he, you know, even says that people
who don't get vaccinated don't get
autism,
>> right? And he suggests that, for
example, the Amish
don't get vaccines and therefore don't
get autism, which I went and fact
checked myself. I know we're going to
fact check after we get through these
remarks. and and neither of those
statements
>> careful with what he says
>> is true
>> but I'm not so careful what
>> they are not true
>> and do all those other things little
things just spread out your visits etc
etc on the vaccine and I want to thank
everybody this is a very important day
thank you very much
>> aids who run the national institutes of
health and the FDA
they give speeches of their own much
shorter far more restrained than Trump,
but ultimately they all cast some level
of doubt on the practice of taking
Tylenol during pregnancy and reaffirm
the idea that it's risky, may be linked
to autism. So, let's zoom out and talk
about what we really know to be true and
based on science. And we're going to
cover all of what Trump said, but let's
start with the question of Tylenol,
pregnant women, and autism.
Yeah. So, first off, no study has shown
that Tylenol use in pregnancy causes
autism in children. I want to be very
clear about that. What we have seen are
some studies that have shown a positive
association
between Tylenol and childhood autism.
>> And just explain the distinction between
a positive association and a cause.
>> Yeah. So, it's a correlation. We can't
conduct randomized control trials on
pregnant women. It is widely held to be
unethical to do something like that. So
what researchers have to do is look at
data on pregnant women, the choices that
they make during their pregnancies, the
experiences that they have, and look at
the outcomes in their children. These
are called observational studies. And
the problem with observational studies
is that there can be lots of other
things going on that might be underlying
the relationships that we end up seeing
in the results. In fact, I had a really
interesting conversation with an
epidemiologist who was lead author on a
study that RFK actually cited multiple
times in this press conference because
he did find a positive correlation
between Tylenol use in pregnancy and
autism. and he actually warned very
explicitly against drawing any sort of
causal conclusions here. Um he brought
up the example of rising ice cream sales
and rising violent crime in the
summertime. And he said that, you know,
it would be a mistake to assume that ice
cream sales are causing violent crime.
That actually the thing that's causing
both of those things is the heat. So, it
would be a mistake to assume that
Tylenol use during pregnancy is actually
causing autism when there might be other
underlying things at play, like what
underlying health issues does the mother
have? What are her genetics? Why is she
actually taking Tylenol repeatedly over
the course of her pregnancy? Is it to
treat multiple fevers? These are the
sort of questions that researchers need
to be asking to actually tease apart
cause and effect in these studies. In
other words, in that metaphor of ice
cream sales and violence going up in the
summer, Tylenol's relationship to rising
autism could be akin to either the ice
cream sales or the violence going up. It
may not be the real underlying cause. It
may not be the heat.
>> Right. Exactly. And we know that autism,
ADHD, other neurodedevelopmental
disorders have a big genetic component.
So there have been some researchers who
have attempted to account for that in
these observational studies and actually
do what's called a sibling matched
control. So they compare siblings born
from the same mother. And when they do
that they see that the relationship that
the correlation between Tylenol use and
and autism actually goes away.
>> So that suggests that you know the
genetics might be the heat in this
scenario. But just to be very clear,
when President Trump says to America and
to America's pregnant women, do not take
Tylenol, that does not, based on your
reporting, based on all the research
that you have just described, seem at
all grounded in the current science.
>> No, it's not. I mean, something else the
president raised was this question of,
well, what's the downside of not taking
pylenol? He asked that a few times
during this press conference, and he
seemed to say there's no downside of
pregnant women avoiding Tylenol. What
does the research say about that?
>> Yeah, I mean, he actually says, you
know, to tough it out, but the research
on this is very clear. You know, fevers
in pregnancy come at great risk to both
the mother and the fetus. In fact,
during the news conference, the American
College of Obstitricians and
Gynecologists issued a statement
stressing that the organization
considers acetaminophen safe. Um, and
they said that the conditions people use
acetaminophen to treat during pregnancy
are far more dangerous than any
theoretical risks and can create severe
morbidity, mortality for the pregnant
person and the fetus. You know, every
doctor I spoke with, every medical group
that uh was responding to this issue
today has made clear fevers are not
things that should be left untreated
during a pregnancy. So, in this case, do
not listen to the the president.
>> I also want to fact check the
president's claims about vaccines. It's
been firmly established and we've talked
about it a lot on the show and
throughout Times journalism that there's
no documented link between childhood
vaccines and autism. But Trump insisted
on suggesting that there was. He
specifically targeted as you mentioned
earlier the hepatitis B vaccines and the
MMR vaccines. Both are extremely common
vaccines given to newborns.
>> Yeah. So there has been no data
connecting the MMR vaccine, the vaccine
against measles, mumps and reubella or
connecting the hepatitis B vaccine to
autism in children. And you know, we
have three decades of studies that have
shown this. And yet today, we heard the
president of the United States casting
doubt on vaccines yet again. Right. I
mean, I mean, given everything you just
walked through, the number of times that
the president issued forceful and
specific medical advice that contradicts
what medical groups have said, what
existing scientific research says, in
some cases, the outright misinformation
he put forward.
What should our understanding be of why
he would do this?
I think this question feeds into a lot
of pet narratives that Trump is focused
on all the time. You know, his
anti-establishment thinking. You know,
the experts knew this and they were
hiding this from you that, you know, the
pharmaceutical companies have actually
been profiting off of your family's pain
and I'm going to be the one to to be the
truth teller in this situation.
I think what's really important is to to
look at what Trump and his health
advisers on that stage today actually
didn't say, which is what we do know
about the causes behind the rise in
autism. And those answers don't feed the
sort of anti-establishment narrative
that Trump is seizing on here. Those
answers have a lot more to do with how
autism has been defined and diagnosed
over the last several decades.
We'll be right back.
So, Azen, right before the break, you
mentioned that a big well understood
cause of autism's rise is how it's been
diagnosed. So, just explain that and why
that was not something mentioned in
Monday's news conference. Yeah. So, over
the last several decades, what we
actually consider to be autism has
broadened a lot. Autism used to only
refer to young children who had really
severe impairments. People with severe
language delays or, you know, who
couldn't speak or who often had
intellectual disabilities and couldn't
live or function really independently.
But over time, we have broadened the
diagnosis of autism to include people
with much less severe impairments and
we've folded other diagnoses including
something called Asberers under one
umbrella that we now refer to as autism
spectrum disorder. So it's a spectrum
from on the one end people who really
have these profound disabilities to on
the other end people who maybe have some
social and communication challenges but
might be even highly intelligent. You
know, Elon Musk is always brought up as
an example of someone who has spoken
about having an Asperger's diagnosis.
>> And just how much is this broader
diagnosis, this bigger spectrum of
autism seen as accounting for the growth
in autism in the US? This meteoric rise,
as Trump puts it,
>> it is a lot of the rise, but it is not
the whole thing. The CDC has actually
published data showing that while the
number of diagnoses of kids with
profound autism, so those are the kids
with the most severe impairments, that
those diagnoses have increased a little
bit over the last couple decades, the
increase in diagnosis among kids who are
quote unquote higher functioning is
actually increasing a lot more quickly.
So that seems to be very clearly a big
driver in the increased diagnoses that
we're seeing in this country. However,
every researcher I've spoken to has said
that that is not the only thing that is
going on here. We've identified now
hundreds of genes that are associated
with autism. We know that those genes
interact with each other. We also know
that they interact in some way with the
environment. And in terms of what
environmental factors could be doing
that, we have some evidence of things
that are definitely playing a role. Air
pollution is one. We know certain toxic
chemicals interact with genes and
contribute to a rise in autism. A very
clear other factor is people having
children later in life, um, which we
know is happening more and more as
people delay having kids.
>> So, all of those things are linked, but
there's still a lot we don't know. And
scientists are always going to be the
first to say that it's very very
possible that there are other risks out
there in the environment that we don't
know about yet.
>> But if we do know that this expanded
diagnosis of autism is a pretty big
factor in the rise in autism, I know you
mentioned other potential factors, but
this one seems kind of indisputable.
Why wouldn't the health secretary or the
president focus on that in this news
conference?
>> Yeah, I mean RFK has actually been
pretty dismissive of the role of
diagnosis in increasing incidents of
autism in the US before. I mean, we
talked about this earlier, but it is not
an answer that has a shadowy
pharmaceutical company behind it. It is
not an answer that has, you know,
experts concealing things from the
public. It's a lot more boring and
procedural. Frankly,
>> what I hear you basically saying is that
people like President Trump, people like
RK Jr. prefer the silver bullet theory,
the somebody did you wrong theory and a
broader diagnosis by the medical
community of autism over the past 25
years doesn't fit into that. I want to
return now to Monday's news conference
and what happens next now that the
president is putting so much weight on
Tylenol despite any evidence of
causality when it comes to autism.
The president and those around him
started to outline a series of actions
that would seem to flow from that
alleged link. And so I want you to walk
us through what comes now.
>> So coming out of today's press
conference, they announced four actions
that they were going to take to address
autism in the United States. The first
thing that they do is RFK says that the
FDA is going to be initiating the
process to put a new label on
acetaminophen. So presumably this will
be something like a warning label on
Tylenol to warn patients that there is
this possibility of a link. The FDA also
sent a letter to doctors across the US
today about the possible link between
acetaminophen use during pregnancy and
autism. Really interestingly they were
far more measured uh in this letter than
the president's remarks. The letter says
really explicitly that you know a causal
relationship has not been established
and they say that the matter is an
ongoing area of scientific debate but
nevertheless they still urge doctors to
warn patients that there is the
possibility of this link and that they
shouldn't take Tylenol except in the
case of high fevers.
>> Right. Very different than the president
saying do not take Tylenol when you're
pregnant.
>> Yes. Very different. And then the third
thing that they did was that the FDA
announced that it was going to be
approving a new treatment for autism. It
is this drug called Lucavorin. It is a B
vitamin based drug and it has shown in
very small studies. So we're talking
about, you know, just dozens of
participants in each that it could have
some positive benefits for children with
autism. So improving communication,
things like that. But this is very
unusual for them to be pushing through
an approval like this, you know, with so
little data to back it.
>> And what do you make of that? That this
drug has only been tested in dozens of
people and yet now the government wants
to approve it for use as a treatment for
autism and is talking about it and
endorsing it on such a giant platform.
>> Yeah. I mean I think it it is absolutely
projecting to people that this is
possibly going to lead to a cure and the
scientists who are actually researching
lucorin as a possible treatment they are
the first to say like our findings are
really early days you know they are
promising but this is not something that
should be at the level of the federal
government pushing through a drug
approval of the FDA
>> and the last thing is that they
announced that they had determined the
recipients of you know $50 million
dollar of new federal grants that would
be used to study the causes of autism.
And again, it's this mixed bag. There
are absolutely legitimate researchers
who have received this funding who are
going to be looking into the genetics
and the the interplay with the
environment. But RFK also made clear
that they're also going to be looking
again, despite the many, many studies
that have failed to show a link at the
possibility that vaccines play a role in
development of autism.
I mean, how should we think about what
happened on Monday? On the one hand, the
White House is giving people with autism
something. They're elevating autism in a
way perhaps no administration has ever
done before. But the way especially
Trump did that seems to absolutely test
and in a few cases absolutely exceed the
bounds of what we think of as
responsible public health. And just to
put a point on that, our colleague
Christina Jwitt got an email from the
head of medical ethics at NYU's medical
school, pretty prestigious medical
school here in New York. And after
watching this news conference, this is
what he wrote to her. Quote, "The
announcement on autism was the saddest
display of a lack of evidence, rumors,
recycling old myths, outright lies, and
dangerous advice I have ever witnessed
by anyone in authority in the world
claiming to know anything about
science."
So, how should we think about that
stacked up against what maybe
what the Trump administration thinks is
providing an answer to families with
autism?
I mean, I have spoken to many autistic
people, many families of autistic people
in the process of doing this reporting
and the autistic community is not a
monolith. There are people who are
viewing what RFK is doing and from
beginning to end see it as harmful.
But then I've spoken with the parents of
kids with the most severe impairments
and they have really made clear that
they're so torn about RFK and and this
moment for autism in this country. They
absolutely appreciate that he is
spotlighting autism, that he's throwing
research money to find out the causes,
that he is talking about their
experience. But they really, really
struggle with and are really worried
about the fact that that comes with
recycling these theories about autism
that have been just proven to be false.
that it comes with a lot more
fear-mongering directed towards pregnant
women. So that, you know, if they do
have a child with autism that they
somehow think that it was something they
did during pregnancy, that it was their
fault, that, you know, they didn't tough
it out.
They see RFK and Trump doing that and
they they kind of don't know what to do
with it. They appreciate the focus and
they really struggle with what the
consequences of what that focus might
be.
Well, Zen, thank you very much. We
appreciate it.
>> Thanks, Michael.
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know a day.
On Monday, ABC said that the late night
host Jimmy Kimmel would return to its
airwaves beginning tonight, despite the
fierce outcry from conservatives over
his comments about the assassination of
Charlie Kirk. The reversal came after
Hollywood unions and hundreds of actors
and directors condemned ABC's decision
as a betrayal of free speech. But at
least one major owner of ABC stations,
the Sinclair Broadcast Group, said that
it would not run Kimmel's show and would
instead replace it with news.
Today's episode was produced by Alex
Stern, Nina Feldman, and Rob Zipco with
help from Alexandra Lee Young. It was
edited by Liz O. Balin and Michael
Benois and was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Aubaro. See you tomorrow.
[Music]